Place three observations on our evidence bench.
A wooden block keeps its shape.
Water takes the shape of its cup.
Air fills a balloon.
We can observe each behaviour.
Now we need an explanation that connects them.
Scientists use a particle model.
It treats matter as tiny moving pieces.
Notice the order: evidence first, model second.
The colourful dots are not the evidence.
A useful model should explain several observations and help us predict a new result.
It should also have a clear limit.
Our simple model cannot show every detail of real particles.
Start with the block.
In our solid model, particles are close together and remain in mostly fixed positions relative to their neighbours.
They are not perfectly still; we show a small vibration.
This arrangement helps explain why the block keeps its own shape and is difficult to squash.
The particles are already close, so there is little empty space to remove.
The model does not say every solid is hard: rubber can bend, and a sponge is solid material with air spaces.
The picture explains a broad pattern, not every property.
Pour water from a short cup into a wide bowl.
Its shape changes, but the water still takes up space.
In the liquid model, particles stay close together and slide past one another.
This helps explain flow and changing shape.
It also explains why a sealed syringe full of water is very hard to push.
The particles are already close together.
Do not picture each particle as a tiny wet drop.
Wetness is a property we notice when many water particles act together.
Our dots show spacing and movement.
They do not show the real shapes of water molecules.
Now consider air trapped in a capped syringe with no needle.
When the plunger is pressed gently, the trapped air occupies less space.
Release it, and the plunger can move back.
In our gas model, particles are much farther apart than in solids and liquids,
moving in many directions through the available space.
Pressing the plunger does not shrink each particle.
It reduces the spaces between them.
That distinction matters.
Use only a classroom syringe designed for demonstrations, keep it pointed away from faces,
and press gently with the outlet securely capped.
Never use a needle, never trap reactive materials, and never force a stuck plunger.
Compare two identical capped syringes.
One holds air.
An adult fills the other with water.
A gentle push moves the air plunger much farther.
The particle model explains the difference.
Gas particles have large gaps between them.
Liquid particles are already close together.
At this level, we say liquids are very hard to compress.
This does not mean there is no space at all between liquid particles.
Never force either syringe.
The fair comparison changes one thing: air or water.
The clear difference gives our spacing model useful evidence to explain.
Imagine an adult opens a small container with a scented cotton pad in a ventilated room.
After a while, someone farther away may notice the scent.
Nobody stirred the whole room.
Scent particles moved and mixed with air particles.
This gradual spreading is diffusion.
More scent particles begin near the container.
Over time, they spread into places with fewer scent particles.
The particle model helps explain the pattern.
Use an animation unless a teacher has checked for allergies and approved a mild scent.
Never sniff any chemical directly.
Our noses detect the scent, but they do not let us see the particles.
Diffusion also happens in liquids.
Place one drop of food colouring into still water.
Watch from the side without stirring.
The colour slowly spreads beyond its starting point.
Our model says moving water and colouring particles become more mixed over time.
However, visible swirls may also come from currents in the water.
Those currents can be caused by small temperature differences.
This is the scene's one important limit: the cup does not show diffusion alone.
Scientists improve the check by keeping temperature steady, repeating the trial and recording what they see.
One attractive pattern is useful evidence, but it is not complete proof.
Focus on the pattern.
At first, many colouring particles are crowded into one small region.
They move and collide with water particles.
Over time, the colouring becomes more evenly spread.
Scientists call the crowded region a region of higher concentration.
Places with fewer colouring particles have lower concentration.
The overall spread goes from higher to lower concentration.
Individual particles do not follow straight orders towards empty spaces.
Their paths are irregular.
The even spread is the large result of all that motion.
Particles still move after the colour looks even.
The main limit is that our neat animation makes real collisions look much simpler.
A model becomes stronger when it makes a useful prediction.
Suppose one drop of colouring enters two identical cups, one shallow and one tall,
at the same temperature with no stirring.
Which will look evenly coloured first?
Consider distance, currents and container shape, then test.
The shallow cup offers a shorter vertical distance, but real water movement can complicate the result.
A careful prediction names the pattern and conditions: if temperature and disturbance are controlled,
colouring should gradually spread in both cups, although mixing times may differ.
Collect the explanatory wins.
Close, mostly fixed particles help explain why a solid keeps shape.
Close, sliding particles help explain why a liquid flows but resists compression.
Widely spaced moving particles help explain why a gas fills available space and can be compressed.
Constant motion and mixing help explain diffusion.
The model connects several observations, but the animation itself is not evidence.
Evidence came from the investigations; the animation is our representation.
If future evidence does not fit, scientists adjust or replace the model rather than ignoring the observation.
Now reveal three drawing conventions.
First, the dots are far too large.
Real particles are much smaller compared with the container.
Second, the bright colours are labels chosen by the artist.
They are not real particle colours.
Third, the arrows simplify motion.
Real particles collide and change direction many times.
Stop after those three reveals.
The model has one clear job: compare spacing, arrangement and motion.
It does not show exact particle appearance or scale.
The word particle is also a broad label.
It may mean an atom or a molecule, depending on the substance we are modelling.
Listen to four claims and repair each one.
'Gas has no matter' becomes 'gas is matter whose particles are widely spaced in this model.
' 'A compressed gas has crushed particles' becomes 'compression mainly reduces the gaps.
' 'Liquid particles are wet drops' becomes 'wetness describes many particles interacting at a surface,
not one drawn dot.
' 'Diffusion happens because particles want to spread out' becomes 'irregular particle motion and collisions produce an overall spread.
' Good explanations do more than mark a statement wrong.
They replace it with a mechanism connected to evidence.
Notice also that we say the model suggests or helps explain.
We do not pretend a Grade 4 drawing contains the whole microscopic story.
A sealed flexible bag looks almost empty, but when squeezed, another part bulges.
Is there matter inside?
Yes.
The shape change suggests trapped gas moving through available space.
Our model shows widely spaced moving particles, but not the exact gas mixture,
molecular shapes or forces in the plastic.
Compare a sealed bag of water.
It changes outer shape, but its volume changes very little under gentle pressure.
The contrast connects flow, space and compression without seeing individual particles.
Design a low-risk investigation for one model prediction.
Choose the question: does one drop of colouring spread differently in still water at two safe temperatures?
An adult prepares cool and comfortably warm tap water, never hot water.
Use identical clear cups, equal water amounts, the same colouring, one drop placed in the same position,
and no stirring.
Record photographs at equal time intervals.
Temperature is the planned difference; cup shape, volume and drop size are controlled.
Even then, convection currents can affect the result, so repeat and report variation.
The goal is not to force a tidy answer.
It is to gather evidence that can challenge or refine our explanation.
Finish every particle explanation with three parts.
First, name the evidence: trapped air becomes smaller under gentle pressure.
Second, use the model: gas particles are widely spaced, so compression reduces the gaps between them.
Third, name a limit: the dots are not to scale and do not show exact particle shapes or forces.
Try the same frame for diffusion.
Evidence: colouring spreads through still water.
Model: moving particles become more mixed over time.
Limit: visible currents may also move the water, and the animation simplifies collisions.
This evidence-model-limit pattern keeps our science useful and honest.
You are ready to explain observations without mistaking the drawing for reality.